So in the two previous videos we saw the two basic ways to store information in javascript using variables
and arrays in the next few videos.
We're going to see how we can use javascript to affect the logic of the application i.e. what it does.
The code that we've written so far is going to do the same thing every time.
What if we want our code to do different things depending on different situations.
Well for that we use an IF statement.
So let's get rid of the code we've got so far.
And can you set up a variable for me called X with a value of 1 different
IP manage that var to create a variable x to name the variable and then equals one to give it that value.
So what we're going to do with this is create an if statement which depends on the value of x.
And this looks like this.
So we start with if and then in parentheses we put our condition that we want to be true.
And I'm going to test for whether or not x is equal to 1.
That might seem a bit crazy when I know that x is equal to 1 but just stay with me for the moment.
Now we test whether x is equal to 1 using x and then double equals 1.
Now that can be quite confusing for new programmers but it actually makes a lot of sense when you see
a single equals in a program.
It means that you're setting the value of something to something else.
When you see a double equals means we're testing whether or not those two things are the same.
So it's a logical difference and therefore there's a different symbol.
So it's two equal signs but it is a very common beginner mistake to just put one equal sign there and
then what you'll find is this will set X's equal to 1 and say that the statement is true which is very
rarely what you want to happen.
So always put two equal signs in in an if statement and then just like with functions that we saw a
few videos ago we have curly brackets to contain whatever code we want to happen if X is one.
So we might for example just alert X is 1.
Hurrah.
So let's just check see what happens x is indeed one.
What would happen then in this program if I changed x to be to what would happen when I run it.
Have you got the answer which is absolutely nothing because X is not one anymore.
So it's not going to alert that we can actually have an else statement at the end of our IF statement
which will do something.
If this is not true.
So if x is 1 then we're going to let that.
If it's not we'll alert X is not one.
Simple as that.
So now when we run it we get X is not one.
And of course if we change it back to 1 we'll get X's equal to 1.
So this is obviously a very simplistic example and may seem a little bit inane.
So let's try and link it with something that we might have in a real web page.
So something that almost every web app needs to do at some point is to log you in.
And obviously if statements are absolutely crucial to that so you can expect the user to enter a username
and password and then you're going to use an IF statement to see if the user name is correct and the
password is correct.
Then load the user in if not give them some sort of error message.
So are we going to create a very minimal in system and I'm actually going to get to see this as a challenge
rather than have a user name and a password.
We're going to have a magic word.
Now you can set that magic word to be whatever you like but what I want is for our page to say what
is the magic word and then have a text input for the user to enter it and a button when they're done
and then an alert to tell them whether or not they've got it right.
Simple as that.
Go for it.
All right.
Hope you managed it.
So let's have a paragraph tag saying what is the magic word.
And then on the next line we'll have an input with a type of text and an ID of
a magic word.
And then on the final line we'll have our button
with an ID of check.
Magic word.
That's what we're going to do when the button is pressed.
And we'll have to on our button we go up and we still get our code running say X is still one.
Excellent.
That looks good.
So now we've written the content of our page.
Let's write the logic.
So we only want logic to happen when the button is pressed.
So we know how to do that now hopefully document does get element by ID.
The idea of the button is check the magic word and we want to set on click to be equal to a function
that we are going to make and then we put that function in brackets.
So first off as always I'm just going to let something just to make sure that everything is connected
up right.
That we get.
So definitely recommend always writing your javascript.
Step by step like this not doing it all in one go.
So now what we're going to need to do is get the value of whatever the user has typed so we can check
it against our magic word.
So let's create a variable for that.
And I'm going to call it magic word and
and I'm going to set that equal to the value of this text input.
So remember the text input as an ID of magic word.
So we'll use document don't get element by id
magic word and we want to get the value of that to as we did in the previous video datt value to get
the value of that.
And once again because I like things happening really step by step I'm just going to alert the value
of that to make sure that everything once again is wired up correctly.
So let's just put in I SDF SDF brilliant step by step is much less likely to go wrong.
Much easier to fix it if you do go wrong.
All right.
The second variable I'm going to create is the actual magic word because I want to keep this not kind
of embedded deeply in my code.
I might want to change it at some point so I'm going to have abra cadabra as my magic word for obvious
reasons.
And now what we want to do is set up how if statement and it's pretty straightforward hopefully.
So if and then parentheses.
If a magic word entered is equal to and remember we need the double equals because with checking whether
or not is equal to.
Rather than setting it equal to if that's equal to magic word
we'll just alert something like You got it.
And then obviously if this was a real kind of Web page we did add some logic for either logging the
user in or doing whatever it is that this page is supposed to do when the user get gets the magic word
correct.
And if it's not we'll alert no try again.
There we go.
So that should do it.
Let's find out.
Let's get it right.
First of Bora Bora and you got it.
Fantastic.
And then if we end to anything else.
Nope try again.
Brilliant.
So I hope you manage to do that more or less by yourself.
Hopefully this gives you a clear idea of why if statements are so important.
Essentially they allow us to do something on a certain condition happening and that's absolutely central
to the idea of programming.
And in fact now that we know about if statements were capable of building some basic javascript games
and we're going to do that in the next video where we'll make a simple game called how many fingers.